 
The gods relieve my watch: that's all I ask.
Year-long I've haunched here on this palace roof, year-long been the all-fours watch-dog of the Atreids, learning by rote the slow dance of the stars, spectator of the brilliance in black skies
that brings to men their winters and their suns:
the stately light-lords' settings and their rise.
I'm here still. Still watching for the fire,
the relayed beacon that will bring the word
that Troy is taken: watching by command
of the heart of a woman who waits, her mind like a man's.
My rest is a sleep-walk, sweated clammy dew,
a sleep-walk which no kind dreams over-watch.
The presence by my bed's not rest but terror, eyelid-spasming drowse-out-jolting terror.
And when I think to sing or hum some tune
to inject alertness since no sleep will come,
the tune becomes tears how miss-fortune freights his house, the song is miss-rule capsizing mastership.
But now, gods, change my luck. Relieve my task, shine out the dark good news for which I ask!
The beacon is seen.
A blaze in the night, as bright as day—it's here! O how I welcome you, you telltale flame speaking to me of dancing of the streets,
all Argos celebrating Troy's downfall!
Awake—aiai—awake!
I signal too, to Agamemnon's wife:
to leave her bed at once and set the house
aright with victory-howl to bless this blaze...
If the citadel of Troy is really taken...
...that's what this shining messenger should mean. —Why, yes; and I will dance the overture!
What falls well for my lord, falls well for me:
this semaphore's my dice rolled six times three.
And may it be my master, when he comes,
will clasp this hand with his love-hallowed hand. There's more, but I won’t say it. The saying goes:
“My tongue's become where the trampling oxen stand.” You could ask the house. If this house had a mouth, this house would speak.
  
I mean my words just so.
  
  
They’re dark to those in the dark: not to those in the know. He descends and goes into the palace.
 
Decade of home-emptiness
this, since the Priam-war
moved to prosecution:
Menelaus led it and Agamemnon,
Zeus-set on twin thrones and twin-sceptred, twin-yoked in honour as Atreus's sons: launched here a fleet of a thousand destroyers packed out with warriors, a military task-force off from this land:
calling the war-god great in their fury, screaming like eagles at peak of grief's ecstasy over their young:
wheeling and turning high in the vortex, rowing the air with the blades of their wing-tips over their nests,
lost to them now their confinement of care lost for so long.
But higher up still, they are heard by some Apollo,
by some Pan or Zeus—the harsh scream of these guests in his realm; overdue, slow,
he hunts down the eagles' assailants, he strikes them all low overwhelmed.
Thus Zeus almighty sent the sons of Atreus,
Zeus guest-protector set them on Paris,
sent in pursuit of a multi-manned woman:
sent with them death-bouts and leaden-limbed strugglings, sent strength of youths' knees snapped in the dust,
sent with them spear-shafts smashed in the onset, sent these for Greeks and for Trojans alike.
That's how things stand. The Fates know no escape-clause. Nor secret sacrifice, extra libation,
nor private gifts of quiet pleading tears
can bend their spite, their wrath wears out the years.
But we stand in tattered flesh old past all usefulness,
left out of that weapon-take, leaning our child's strength here on our walking-sticks.
A little boy's vitality leaps in his sternum but he's no warrior, Ares the killing-god
  
  
  
  
  

 
not yet at home:
just like him, senility's leaves drop late-autumn, a stick props its tottering noon-dream roam.
But Leda’s daughter and Tyndareos’, you, queen Clytaemestra,
what need, what news,
what message-rumour's made
you send your stewards round, commanding all these rites?
For all the gods this city knows,
heaven-gods or underworld,
from mystery-gods to market-idols—    every altar blazes with a burning offering bright.
On this side and that
as high as the heaven
their lamp ascends,
dosed by the clean-burning supple coaxing
holy oil lends,
fires anointed with fuel the queen herself sends.
O say what you can of this, Queen. Explain—what's allowed. So bring relief to the burden by which we are bowed,
to our expectations one minute so darkly ill,
the next as bright as the sacrifice-flame of fresh kill,
   
as hope fends away the mood of the darkest part, the ravenous ache of despair that eats out the heart.
[Silence.]
One thing I can still:
sing of the omen,
parting victory-omen
sent to our war-lords.
Though age has grown old with me, age still breathes divinely,
still sends the song-strength the wingèd words.
Here's how the two-throned might of Achaia,
captains of Greek cadets two grown to one end,
were set on the spear’s way,
the hand’s way of mighty deeds, by an omen—two eagles— against Troy and its land:
ship-kings shown sky-kings plain, none could miss them, right over the palace roof,
strophe  
   

one black-tailed and one white:
on the well-omened side
catching a mother-hare
ripping her offspring unborn into sight.
We sense the pain to come; say all come right.
Then Calchas diligent,
military diviner,
seeing the Atreids
twinned in their temper,
twinned in their war-love,
cast them as the eagles:
these two generals were the butchers of the hare.
“In time this task-force will take Priam's city,
in time all Troy's people be herded there like cattle by its burning towers
to be raped by their fates”—
he looked at the omen, saw this meaning there.
“But how to avoid nemesis, bitter gods' jealousy, shadow on the army
sent to halter Troy?
Holy Artemis is watching,
she saw Zeus's winged hounds,
hated their butchery:
she pitied the embryos, the helpless shredded hare.”
We sense pain comes; we say well all will fare.
“Artemis, so merciful
to savage lions' little ones,
sweet to every suckling cub
wandering in the wilds,
let these portents come to good
since they fall auspicious-side,
pass over the sense of dread that we feel lurking still.
And I invoke the healer,
Paian, to persuade her
to raise no lingering anti-winds
that pin the fleet in port,
to demand no second sacrifice,
lawless, not to feast on,
cogenerate with blood-feud sets man and wife at ill.
For a god-wrath is lurking there, fearful, resilient,
   
antistrophe  
   
   
   

 
a homemaker whose smile's a trap a child-avenging mind.”
So did Calchas prophesy,
amid the usual blessings,
fateful words upon the march, to the kings; and still
we like him sense pain to come, say all go well, not ill.
Zeus—whoever Zeus may be—
if “Zeus” is for mortals to sing—
by Zeus' name will I call to him,
seeing not even everything
set in one scale counter-balances him
set in the other ; to Zeus must I sing
if my false-conceiving mind's to be truly free
of the empty senseless dread that encompasses me.
Nor whatever ci-devant
god broiling in all-warring might—
I will not even mention him
nor his successor slight.
Zeus's forerunners are no match for him, his arm puts them to flight.
The prudent mind awards Zeus victory: wisdom gives Zeus first place in piety.
For Zeus's law is first in all the world.
The law is this: no wisdom without pain.
Slow process of the watching soul's unsleep
distils tear-drip of threnody within;
wanted or not by us, such wisdom's gained;
its score, its etch, its scar in us goes deep.
The grace of the gods, the bright powers set on high, is overpowering, sharp, involuntary.
The admiral sits there with his sails all furled,
his ships becalmed. No Calchas bears his blame. Nothing to do but whistle across the still deep,
to watch his army watch till they starve thin.
So Agamemnon waits on Aulis' plain
where the treacherous strait’s dark undersurges sweep round the pride of Greece's fleet, trapped, stationary, round a thousand hulls of seasick infantry.
The ice-breath that breathes down from the Balkan north breeds bad idleness, worse settings-forth.
Desertions rot the men, mould rots the sails.
And still the relentless north's tormenting gales
nag and rub the place already raw
as Argos' flower's bleached to dead white straw.
strophe      
antistrophe      
strophe      
antistrophe  
   
strophe  
   Cp. the golden chain of Iliad  .  -  .

Till Calchas recalls Artemis
the eagles and the leverets
till he tells the generals there's another way.
His words rush on the Atreids
his cure's worse than the weather-curse
they stamp their war-staves, hide wet eyes, howl, pray.
Silence. Then steps Agamemnon forth, first of the blood, the elder by his birth. “A hard thing this if our obedience fails; no less hard for a father—for a trail
of a daughter’s blood—across the altar poured— tracked by my child-red hands for ever more—
But tell me, what’s the ill-free course?
I can’t turn deserter,
a general double-crossing troops he promised a bounty-day. If virgin blood will stop the winds
they're bound to want to urge her blood.
May it be well. May it be well. There is no other way.”
    antistrophe  
   
So with relief he gave it Necessity’s name.
Once necked in his yoke, though, we smelt off him something unclean,
something desanctified, something set free to defile; new look in his face that said All is permitted for me. Bad wisdom sets us out of reach of shame,
then traps us in the oldest snares of all.
So he
sensed the barriers dissolve that kept him from killing his child,
from butchering her to steel the Bride-War’s grip; he’d sacrifice her to give good speed to his ships.
Once trapped, she wept, called on her father’s name— as if Iphigeneia’s maidish scream
could move his crew of genocidophiles,
his entourage of death-squads; or move him.
He said the prayers, then had them lift her frame, thin as a goat-kid’s, dress splayed in un-seem, head lolling shocked, yet still a lovely child.
A silken cincture gagged her pale fine lips
lest her last words reverse the spell for the ships,
lest her last words be a curse on her father's home.
Her saffron satin fell from her, a stream
of bright cloth flowing to the wet earth, while
her only weapon left, her dazed eyes’ gleam, shard-of-mirror-sharp, stabbed at hearts of stone.
She used to sing for her father’s parties. She now seemed to fight her gag for one last song: still the child
too young for sex, little girl on Father’s hip,
who performed so sweet at the third libation’s sip.
strophe      
antistrophe      
strophe      

 
And then? Unseen unthinkable unknown
but Calchas does not scheme unenacted schemes. Justice weights her scales, sets you this trial:
no wisdom without pain. And all you dream, your fragile futureness—best let it go,
best wait until you see, not hope unseen.
Clarity comes with time, and it dawns meanwhile.
Enter  .
But may all that comes be a victory song on our lips!
We serve you, O queen—while the king is away with the ships.
Addressing her directly.
We approach, Clytaemestra, reverent of your rule;
as of course we should, when the man-throne is vacated and his wife is left to fill it as best she can.
For now we would gladly hear—though we cannot demand— whether there's news, or whether it is just hope
and nothing more solid that leads you to sacrifice so?
 
As your proverb says, let good news come in the dawn, she-dawn that is daughter of kindly mother Night.
I have a tale to tell you more solid than hope.
Our Greek army's captured the citadel of Troy.
 
What did you say? I cannot believe it's true.
 
The Greeks hold Troy. Is that plain enough for you?
 
Now joy creeps in, calling forth a rising tear.
 
Your wet eye makes your right-minded loyalty clear.
 
But what is your evidence? Is there some proof you've received?
 
Of course I have proof; unless some sly he-god's deceived.
 
I hope it's not just that you've had some seductive dream.
 
Am I such a fool as to mix up what's real with what seems?
antistrophe      
   
   

 
Or maybe some rumour's flown in to send your wits wild.
 
You really think that my mind is no more than a child's?
 
So when, according to you, was Troy taken by storm?
 
As I've just said—in the night that gave birth to this dawn.
 
If we took Troy last night—what messenger gets here this morn?
 
The fire-god, in light-speed relay borne!
The first beacon was lit on Ida, the mountain of Troy. Ida's light was seen at Hermes' Rock on Lemnos.
The great blaze they kindled on Lemnos in turn was seen and acknowledged on Athos, Zeus's mountain height. From Athos again in a bright track spanning the sea—
dry pine-wood blazing gold, as bright as the sun—
the message crossed over, as quick as the travelling light, bringing its joy to the lookout of Makistos.
Makistos wasted no time, but all alert
put sleepiness aside and did his part:
his relay-beacon's light blazed out afar
across the Euripus to Messapion's guards.
At once they sparked a pile of withered gorse
and on Messapion passed its answering flame.
The untiring lantern, all unfaltering,
clean overleapt the plain of Asopus
as might the moon in all its ruddy splendour,
and woke the next relay, on from Cithaeron's height. Cithereon's watch sent on the fire-procession
more overdoing than stinting with the fuel;
the glow reflected off the haunted lakes
as far as Aegiplanctus, where it roused
the watchmen to their duty to the fire.
And Aegiplanctus laboured happily
to set a flame like wind-beard in the sky.
Visible beyond the Saronic Gulf,
this touched earth next where it reached Arachne's Peak. Arachne's Peak is the watchpost neighbouring us:
from there it next alighted on our roof,
the light of Ida in true lineage,
arrived in one night on the roof of the Atreids.
You see, all this is just as I chose it would be. This relay covering all the long miles from Troy,
   
   
   
   

 
this race where the final runner is still the first,
still the same victory-fire: I arranged it myself.
You ask me for proof. Well, this is the proof I bring. My news proceeds thus from the very hand of the king.
 
Later, queen, our thanksgivings will be said; but not until we've heard the tale in full
of how Troy's citadel's at last unmade,
a tale as longed-for as it's wonderful.
 
The Greeks hold Troy this dawn: that's all the tale.
I hear Troy echo with two sounds unmixed.
As rich sleek oil and stinging vinegar,
poured in one vessel, hostile stand apart,
so the sleek triumph-howl of the winning army discords with the stinging despair of the tears of defeat. The losers fall headlong upon the bodies,
beloved bodies—husbands, brothers; dead.
A little boy there cradles in his arms
the dead old man who last night cradled him;
his throat, a slave's throat now, is thick with sobs.
But the winners' night of knife-work in dark streets ends with them breakfasting off the slaughtered city. No camp-beds now or quarter-master's rations:
they break into whatever house they like,
they sit and eat whatever they choose to take.
It's their house now the gods have relieved their watch, changed frost-dewed trenches for the blessedness
of sentryless rest that lasts as long as the night.
This can last, if the Greeks can keep respect.
If they can do due homage to Troy's gods,
not trample down their altars, then maybe
they'll find a better fate than a knife in the dark. But not if a lust already burns in them,
captured by greed, for plunder beyond their dues. The race at its furthest point's only halfway run; still to do is the getting safely home.
If the soldier returns not having offended the gods, it may be that the pains of those he destroyed
will sleep unavenged—not bring him a bad end.
Such is my tale, told in this woman's speech.
May all come right, and not ambiguously.
I know my place. It seems better than kingship to me.
 
Lady, you speak almost masculine wisdom and sense. And now I have heard that you have proper evidence
I set myself to speak my thanksgiving prayer;
we have a reward that is worth the long years of our care.
   
   
   
   

O Zeus the King, O Night who fights for us, who fits us out with war-raiment glorious,
who throws across the unscaled towers of Troy the close-wove net of the fate of all-destroy,
the all-dredge net neither young nor old evades, stranding all Troy as our slain or as our slaves— Paris broke guest-friendship, and for this
Zeus the guest-friend’s bow long bent on Paris: so now Zeus’ true and deadly arrow flies
not short into the earth, nor long into the skies.
The blow that staggers them now is the blow of Zeus: whatever else stays unclear, that can be traced.
Zeus decreed it and Zeus did it. Those who use
to say the gods don’t care when men disgrace
with trampling what crude foot must never touch— the fall of Troy shows the insolence of such.
He blows and puffs beyond a mortal’s right; vainglory’s war-swag overflows the house.
I rather choose a painless plain suffice,
to hubris’ heights prefer low common nous.
The plunder-drunk who despoils shrines in his lust may escape a war; he’ll never escape What’s Just.
Smooth insidious speech entices to it,
sweet speech, the child of foreordained destruction. The spell once done, no unspell will undo it;
the trap works not by hiding, but attraction.
A few blows tarnish cheap tin grimy black:
true mettle shows when the Furies are at your back.
The man whose choices bring his state to ruin
can no more hope his reversal-prayers be heard
can no more hope for the wreck he’s made’s undoing than a stumbling toddler catch a soaring bird.
No more than this can childish Paris escape
his ruinous guest-guilt for Helen’s rape.
Yet free-seduced, she flew from this Atreid house.
She stole past our guards, past our barracked, ship-barred gates, daring her dare without caring what dooms she aroused;
she skipped into Troy her contagion of lethal fates.
The wise who saw it groaned both for prince and for house,
for the emptied house, for the spectral prince, who awaits, without hope or wrath, what he no longer wishes to see:
the curves of the faraway form he now hates in her statuary.
   
strophe  
   
   
   
    strophe  
Hidden sorrow reveals itself in dreaming, delusion appears as delight in the emptied heart: delusion, since at first light his wife's seeming
antistrophe  
   
   
antistrophe  

  
skips from his sleep-sight, unreachably apart.
And the empty ache at each army-family's hearth
is hidden too, behind eyes dried fresh from streaming for the dear-faced husbands whom this war returns
as faceless ash in funerary urns.
A refiner’s fire is Ares’; and he makes,
from the counterpoise of spears in his furnace Troy, a weeping soot that floats in heavy flakes
which, shipped in parcels home, cremates all joy. Love rocks in anguish over it, commemorates
the fall-, the glory-sign of each dead boy.
Love breathes a question hidden from the State: “He died to get Menelaus back his toy?”
Not even the sign of an urn returns to some:
their conqueror rots enclosed in the land he won.
The people's murmur's heavy with their blame;
what Menelaus has cost them is their curse.
I sense a black night comes. For all these slain
sum to a fate-debt the all-seeing gods rehearse;
who pushes Justice aside from his path of gain,
the slow Furies drag him down through luck reversed into helpless dark. The highest-daring fame
attracts Zeus' jealous lightning; not averts.
Enough just to live on, not to draw envy, for me, neither captor of cities nor captured and slave to be.
This fire of good-news rumour through the town, who knows if it tells truth, or some god’s deceit? Childish to cheer triumphant, then drop down deflated if the news turns to defeat.
For tongues to wag with intelligence incomplete is natural when a woman wears the crown.
A woman’s edict quickly echoes round;
yet before you can inscribe it, self-deletes.
This message fire, these relayed beaconings—
now we’ll find out sure knowledge: are they true
or has some happy dream led us astray?
Look—real news is arriving from the shore.
Our herald’s coming up the olive-walks,
his cloak all dust of parched-dry matted mud;
that means news in words, not in dumb-show semaphore or bracken crackling on some distant hill.
Will he tell us to rejoice, or will his news—
but I’ll leave unsaid the other thing it could be.
Let him bring new good to add to old good news.
Some may pray the opposite; as for those,
I pray each reap the ill harvest that he sows.
strophe  
   
   
   
   
   
   
antistrophe  
   
   

Enter HERALD. He prostrates himself and kisses the ground. 
HERALD
The soil, the soil that sired me! Argive earth!
Back from this empty decade: the tenth year's turn!
So many hopes shipwrecked. Yet this one, the least, has reached shore. How much hope was left I'd die in my native land,
finish my life here, fill up my family tomb?
Now I greet my land, I greet the light of its sun,
Zeus my land's ruler, and Pythian lord Apollo—
whom I pray to strike us no more with his archery's shafts.
Enemy enough you were by Scamander's stream;
now turn our saviour, come now to salve, not to wound.
This to Apollo. To all the Olympian order
taken together, above all to Hermes their herald—
protector and friend of all heralds, and all heralds' cult—
and to the land's heroes who sent us, my prayer is this:
receive back with love the land's army—at least, what is left.
And I greet the palace, dear home of the Atreid kings, their judgement seats and the sun-facing gods before it. If ever your eyes glistened with greeting tears
let them now welcome our lord after so long a time. For he comes to you like a candle lit in the dark,
he comes to his people: Agamemnon king!
Receive him then well, as well as he deserves:
the ploughman of Zeus who brings retribution to men,
who turned over Troy, who worked that old soil to new loam, killed off every clinging weed he uprooted there.
Such was the yoke of chastisement laid on Troy
by our Atreid lord, this truly happy man.
And now he comes, most worthy of honour of all
of those now living. Paris and Troy cannot boast
they made us suffer more than we made them;
their debt is settled. Convicted on a charge
of rape and theft, Paris forfeits everything;
his prize is lost, and what he's brought upon
his house and land is all-destroying death.
The sons of Priam pay and pay again.
 
First-comer of the returners, welcome here.
HERALD
I am well come indeed; complete and beyond death's fear.
 
You feared to be robbed of return to your fatherland?
   
   
   
   
   To ask, as commentators from Fraenkel on have tended to, how it is that the Chorus’s song goes on for the three weeks or so long enough to give the Herald and Agamemnon time to get back to Argos from Troy, is a harmless foible of scholarly pedantry at which anyone who has ever actually been involved in a play will merely smile and shake her head.

  
HERALD
That was the fear filled these eyes where joy's tears now stand.
 
Then we may rejoice that the army too knew this disease.
HERALD
The army too? Were you not at peace here? At ease?
 
Our time was like yours. It was fear and longing and loss.
HERALD
From the overseas army, our grief for you echoed across?
 
Time of echoes and rebounds of bitterness, truly, it was.
HERALD
And this fit of heartsickness fell on my homeland because... ?
 
My oldest recourse against trouble's to hold my tongue.
HERALD
Some trouble, some fear, the lords being away so long?
 
Your words to describe it, “beyond death's fear”, are not wrong.
HERALD
Beyond fear—for all is done well!
Or mostly so: in a long war it's sure collateral damage will come.
Whose lives escape all blame, all trouble? Only the gods'. Oh, I could speak of hardships and ill-lodgings!
No bed but the verminous straw on the trampling deck, day after day on the bile-green-sliding sea:
when you can't see the land, what doesn't make you sick? Yet when we made landfall things got even worse, bivouacked within bowshot of Troy’s walls
in a mildew marsh that bubbled mephitic mists,
our hair and our clothes alive with crawling horrors.
Or we could talk of the bird-killing cold of the winters, the unbearable cold that blew from the high snows of Ida. Or again of the heat, the doldrum heat of the sea,
the waveless and windless siesta of blank noon.
There's no point now to talk of these past troubles. For past they are; they no more pain the dead;
no morning muster drags them from their beds. They're past as well for us who are alive—
for us dregs of the Argive army that survive.
   
   
   

What we have won outweighs what we have lost. How can we count our casualties in the cost? Rather I think the hour comes to rejoice,
to raise in our bright noon a vaunting voice,
to launch our high boast over land and sea: “At Troy a Greek host once made victory; here are their trophies in their temples hung
as gifts to their gods, as the glories of old song.”
Now you have heard this, it's your turn to praise     your city and your generals; and to raise
your hymn to Zeus. For me, my tale is done.
 
I am happily won by what I hear from you;
what remains young, in the old, is the will to learn. Gestures to the HERALD to enter the palace.
But the news you bring is the palace's concern and Clytaemestra's first—though I profit too.
Enter   from the palace, blocking the HERALD's way.
  (ignoring the HERALD and addressing the  ) You heard me cry the victory-howl before.
When the first fire-sign flared across the night,
you heard me say that Troy was overturned.
Remind me, which of you called me foolish then     for trusting the report of a fatuous flame?
Who said “How womanish! So quick convinced!”?
Yes, I'd quite lost my grip, on your account.
I made due offerings anyway; and womanish, the men of Argos spread my victory-howl across the happy city, censed the altars,
fed our restless gods with soothing flame.
To the HERALD
Why then would I need you to fill me in?
I'll exact a full account from the King himself.
My current hurry is to give my spouse—     my spouse, at whose deeds wondering shame is due—
the welcome he best deserves. Could any wife
see a sweeter sight than this: her husband home,
home from the wars, preserved for her by the gods?
Preserved for me: Agamemnon! Tell him this:
“Come as quick as you can; you see how your city desires you;
in your house awaits a wife unchanged in faithfulness,
just what you left her, the watch-bitch of the house,
right-willed to you, an enemy to ill minds,
unchanged and constant in her character;
she has broken no vow in your time apart;     she knows no more of affairs or adultery-rumours
than of where to cool a new blade's burning steel.”

  
This is my speech, truth-filled in every phrase, which a noblewoman may speak with no disgrace. Exit   into the palace.
 
These are Clytaemestra's words; to those in the know— to interpreters not in the dark—their truth will show.
But Herald, tell me: what of Menelaus? Is he too coming safe back from the war to us again, the dear strength of our land?
HERALD
Comfortable falsehoods reassure;     but told to friends, there's small chance they'll long stand.
 
You cannot, then, speak reassuring fact?
When comfort parts from truth, that's hard to hide.
HERALD
Menelaus went missing sailing back,
him and his ship. No comfort, but no lie.
 
Surely he didn't sail away alone?
Was he then lost in a storm that struck you all?
HERALD
You hit the target like a champion bow.
Your brief words sum the long suffering I recall.
 
So he's alive? Or dead? What rumour goes     around the crews? It's surely known to some.
HERALD
No man can say. The only one who knows may be the overseer of all life, the Sun.
 
And what god-driven storm is this that blows our fleet apart? How ended? How begun?
HERALD
It seems wrong to stain with darkness this bright day,
mix bitterness into its sweet thanksgiving.
The messenger who brings his town the news
it's fended off so long with pleading prayers,
whose ashen face speaks how an army's lost,
how communal calamity's struck the state:     how the city's sons, the households' fathers are
blood sacrificed on the altar of black War,

one public grief and many private woes,
as the double-ruinous tax to Ares goes—
the messenger borne down with words like these his hymn's a death-hosanna to the Furies.
I’m not him. But the one who brings the news of the army saved to its triumphant town—
I’m not him either. My task is to mix
that sweet news with this bitter.
A storm came, A sea-storm big with the anger of the gods.
Fire and water made alliance on us,
lightning-fire, sea-storm water, always foes before; they proved their compact by destroying us.
The first we knew was tsunami in the night:
the northern gales that grate the ships together,
the lightning-fireball, typhoon-confusion,
the hail that shatters glass—all came at once. Ship-prow gored ship-belly; then both sank.
The fleet vanished in the black like driven sheep. And in the bleak-shine brightness of the dawn
we saw the Aegean petalled with our dead,
with floating corpses and with shattered masts.
But our ship—some small touch on the tiller, some god’s touch not a man’s, some stolen chance or prayed-for—had saved us, preserved our ship. Good Luck the saviour, perching on our prow! Somehow we’d been neither swamped at anchor nor smashed to pieces on the nearest shore. Afterwards we had hours to gape at it,
pale in the daylight, pulled from the maw of hell, scarce crediting how the same Luck that saved us had also smashed to matchwood all the rest.
If any of them has breath still in his lungs
no doubt he’s thinking just the same of us,
just as we’re presuming he is dead.
May all lead to the best. For Menelaus,
think of him as close kin to the gods,
their first concern, since Helen is Zeus’ daughter.
So long as the rays of life’s overseer Sun
find him alive somewhere, sight in his eyes,
so long as Zeus wills survival for his heirs,
that long the hope remains that he’ll come home.
And now you’ve heard this, know you’ve heard the truth.
Exit HERALD—not into the palace, but back towards the sea.
   
   
 
Who invented this name, name so fitting, so right, name that maybe came
from the Ones Beyond Sight, from some god who forced,
strophe  
   
   

  
out of dark foreknowledge welling, the name of this spear-whore war-cause Helen?
Out from her boudoir-veils silk light and soft,
under the god-filled sails graced from aloft,
comes Helen, comes hell. Helen: the navy wrecked. Helen: whole armies dead. Helen: the city wracked with mourning's knell.
And hot on her course
the many-manned chase
the puddle-tracks of oars fade behind the fleet race camouflaged in the leaf-shade of Simois' shore
they arrive for the Helen-made murderous War.
Troy's troth-bond with Helen, it bound Troy in truth—
like a bull bound for felling by the axe of god's wrath; wrath that waits long
to avenge a shamed host,
that out-waits the bride-song in which Troy delights most, which Leda's child made them all sing with all joy,
the song Helen bade them re-echo through Troy.
Sing Helen, sing hell.
Helen: the navy wrecked Helen: whole armies dead Helen: the city wracked
with mourning's knell.
For the song that they sang then sounds different now; death-despair's the new anthem in Priam's old town;
Paris, who before
was their darling, they call toy-boy of the blood-whore who's ruined them all.
Once a romping tumbling toy
in a deep-plush coat of gold
was a father's children's playtime joy,
   
antistrophe  
   
strophe  
   
   

chuckled at by the old:
a hunter had brought home with him
a lion-cub for a pet,
mewing suckling cub that mumbled him with toothless gums as yet,
eyes sharp on his hands when he cradled it for whatever it could get.
Time went on; the lion-cub grew;
shy before, it turns to bold;
talon-claws, teeth needle-new,
watch the nature in it unfold;
what the hunter had brought home with him lets its parent instinct out,
pays the old hosts who had smiled at it in bloody cattle-rout:
across the marble floors of the nursery red sacrifices spout.
antistrophe  
We say, with her, there came to Troy
a sea-calm, windless sense
of fortunes rich, serenest joy
with no weapons but love’s glance;
she was perfection, bliss, heart-pierced desire. But once there, she turned a destiny
of doom upon her spouse;
a Fury gifting misery,
a curse fallen on Priam's house;
the irony-guest of guest-friend Zeus's ire,
the bride who burns brides' joys on a weeping pyre.
The old saying is: prosperity, antistrophe   once grown to its full height,
brings forth a fate-posterity,
the offspring of heaven's spite:
each rich man brings disaster on his sons. But I am minded differently:
it is the blasphemous act
that brings forth fatal progeny,
so like it after the fact;
to the house in which the writ of justice runs no offspring but a joyous fortune comes.
Some ancient deed of cosmic insolence conceives new insolence. Amid men's pain, amid the flourishing of men of violence, we watch as it emerges yet again,
foul as its parents. This cannot be fought— uncleanness of impious self-assertion:
a black doom on bright palaces is brought by this dark angel of all self-destruction.
   
   
strophe  
strophe  
   
   
   

  
But still the light shines out where Justice is,
even if Justice is in the peat-smogged hut;
Justice exalts the poor man’s righteousness,
from pompous gold-leaf shrines with her eyes shut— if they were made by unclean hands—she’ll leave
for a house whence humbler purer praise ascends. No flattery-frauds from wealth will she receive: she distributes to all their deservéd ends.
antistrophe  
Enter   riding, with   and much other war-spoil, in a glorious gold-leaf chariot, with attendants and guards following.
Come then, my king, you taker of Troy,
you Atreus' and Tantalus's heir:
how shall I homage you, how shall I yet speak fair? How shall I make my praises of you fly
at target-finding level in the air,
not short into the earth, nor long into the sky,
to bring you what they should—and that is joy?
Plenty of mortals overstepping justice
prefer to the reality, the seeming;
almost all will look for where the true grief is
and fill the air around it with false grieving—
fake and forced, and nowhere near heart-piercing. And likewise in their endless act-rehearsing
they practise their charade, mask on their grin,
to welcome back the general whose luck’s in.
But true shepherds of the people know their sheep, are undeceived by “friendship” watered down,
by the seemings of those eyes that claim to seep from undilute affection for the Crown.
So I won’t try to hide from you, my lord,
that when you led your army forth—for Helen— you cut a figure I could not applaud.
Your plan seemed ill-conceived and uncompelling: to send an army out to die in war
to win back what—a voluntary whore?
But now we elders hide no bitter mind:
to those whose plans work out, our mood is kind. All rulers get the truest information;
and now you’re back, you’ll learn in shortest time from loyal Argos’ unseen population
who’s cleaved to virtue of us, who to crime.
 
First in justice, my salute is Argos:
Argos and its gods, with whose help I
make my homecoming here, now Troy has paid the bill I forced on them.
The gods made trial not of our courtroom speeches, but our deaths;
   
   
   
   

their undivided verdict was for death;
their vote-stones dropped in the blood-red urn of death,
death to the city; while the white mercy-urn,
overpassed by their empty hands, held—air and hope.
Still-burning Troy turns beacon of its own ruin;
destruction’s dust-devils stir the slow-dying ash;
crushed wealth’s last breaths choke out through rain-smeared soot.     For this mercy of the gods we may feel grateful,
if indeed we've exacted due revenge
for Paris’s presumption; if that woman’s price
is prostration humbled by our beast of war,
by the full-armed soldiers that our Horse gave birth to,
dropped from its belly as winter’s stars arose.
They jumped, and the lion that lives on raw red meat
jumped Troy’s wall too and had dead kings’ gore to eat.
So I stretch out this preface-prayer to the gods.
To the  
As for your thoughts: I hear and store your words.
I think the same, and will speak on your side.
Too rarely is this natural for men,
unenvying reverence when a kinsman triumphs. Malice's poison creeps towards the heart,
redoubling the load of the malicious,
who must contend at once with his own woe
and groan to watch another's happiness grow.
I speak here from experience. I well know
that hall of sliding mirrors we call society.
How often my allies' fervent-friend professions
proved smoke and phantoms on the day of battle.
Only Odysseus, who always opposed the war—
even feigned he was mad to try and escape our muster— only he, once in harness, truly pulled his weight.
And whether he's alive now, or has died,
who knows?
But for the rest, our gods and city, we call to a general debate in parliament,
there to advise how what goes well with us
can be set right to last, good constitution kept. And what needs doctoring in this state of ours, whether cauterised or wisely cut away,
we'll seek to turn aside its ill effects.
But now to our entrance at our palace gates.
I come to my own halls, my house and hearth, to make the homecoming-offering to the gods who sent me forth, bring me back safe today. If a true Fortune's followed me, let her stay!
   
He makes to descend from his chariot; but   enters from the palace, and he stops.
   
   

  
 
Elders of Argos, senate of the city,
I'll show you what a tender wife I am,
and feel no shame to do it: for shame fades
with the wearing of the unconsoling years.
I've learned how miserable a wife can be
the years her lord looks up at untaken Troy.
A dreadful thing, to sit at home and wait,
solitary and separate from him,
while one man then another brings bad news,
and worse bad news, and worse, to shake the house. Had the Trojans wounded him as did report,
he’d be more full of holes than is—a net;
if he had died whenever rumour killed him,
he’d be the three-lifed monster revenant,
have had three times his covering of earth,
met three times his once-only burial.
Ill-omened words of back-returning spite
drove me more than once to the home-made noose, to indignity when my house-slaves cut me down. Those rumours—they explain his absence too,
young master of our mutual promises,
who should be here, Orestes. So don't look surprised. He's safe under the guardianship of an ally,
Strophius of Phocis, who advised me
we faced a double threat: with you at war,
the ever-brewing anarchy in the people
might launch some coup against your absent rule:
it's natural to kick the one who's down.
That's the whole reason. There's no trick in this.
Time has dried up the fountain of my tears;
those springs of pity, parched, don’t even drip.
My eyes are strained and sore from endless watch, from the tears I shed for the fires unlit for you
that brought no news, while my sleep’s flimsy cover
was needled through by the small sharp shrill mosquito. Every night the sufferings I saw
enringing you went on all night and more.
All that’s endured and over. With grief mending
I hail you as the watchdog of our steading;
as the mainstay of our ship; as our strong tower
holding our roof up; as sole heir empowered, unlooked-for land in sight of those lost in the ocean, still brightness rising from dark storm’s commotion,
a desert traveller’s first sight of fresh water in motion. These epithets I think him worthy of;
though after all this, we must ward off the envy Above.
But now, dear head, bright imagined head of my dark blessing,
step down from your height for me. Yet do not tread this gross earth with your Ilion-conquering foot.
   
   
   
   
   

You slave-girls whom I told to strew his way with our most costly weaving—do it now.
Now may his paths all merge one crimson red as Justice brings him unexpected home.
As for the rest, sharp thought that outwits sleep will work the fated justice the gods keep.
 
Daughter of Leda, steward of my house,
your speech was like my absence: long stretched out.
The praise I deserve to have should have come from others. No, do not soften my delicious steps
so womanly with this, nor fall and worship,
crying aloud to me like some barbarian.
And do not make me walk this envious way
and draw the waiting wrath down from Above.
These things are honours for the gods, not men.
The man who walks and soils such silken gear—
a fool does this; a twice-fool, with no fear.
I am no god. Give me a human's due.
This sheening scarlet broidure-web I call
no footpath for my trampling to tear through.
God's greatest wisdom-gift is we not fall
into false wisdom we mistake for true.
Living by this thought only quells our fears:
“Call no man happy till he end with happy years”.
 
To me, speak only what seems truth to you.
 
You know I never muffle my real view.
 
At the gods' demand, would you have sacrificed this?
 
I would, on demand of their direct prophecies.
 
Would Priam victorious have ventured this sacrifice?
 
Priam would have trashed this silk and not thought twice.
 
Then what have you to fear but the people's blame?
 
The popular view is important, all the same.
   
 
   
   

  
No man can be great who gives jealousy nothing to chew on.
 
To persist in this word-war's not the part for a woman.
 
And yet in your triumph, defeat in this is becoming.
 
You care so much about winning this victory?
 
Surrender. Be nobler for giving in willingly.
(tempo)
 
If you say so, then quick: some slave unclasp
these war-boots, my feet's bearers over the ground. And as I tread these tapestries, I ask
no evil eye from afar may strike me down.
I am ashamed my footsteps should defile
this costly wealth, this silver-weighted web;
but so be it.
The foreign girl, meanwhile, bring her in softly. Heaven is a lead-
en unresponse except to gentle kings—
and only those who have to, accept slavery.
I bring her home as first prize in the pillaging; she belongs to me by the gift of my infantry.
But now, queen, at your word I bow my head. Like this, through crimson, to my rest I tread.
   
  has descended from his chariot, his feet unshod, and begins to walk slowly across the tapestry.
 
There is the sea. What sun could burn it up?
From cold dark depths I'll fetch your bright red stain;
your life-warm dye will drench your kingly robes.     The price, my lord, is high; but with god's help
we gladly pay. Since when was your house poor?
How many treasure-vestments would I tread
if I was told to by some palace oracle,
if such acts would bring back that precious life?
So long as the root lives, there still lives the green
cool overshade against sun's burning hate.
So your return to your cold palace-hearth
is like a warm spring day that falls in autumn,
like a breath of summer snuffed in the winter hall
where Zeus squeezes out the red wine from the bitter grape;    
   

and so the house receives back its finished king. Exit   into the palace.
Zeus, you finish all. Bring my prayers their end. To what you have waited to finish, now attend.
Exit   into the palace.
 
Why so thick around me now
float the fear-storm-clouds that won't depart?
Why this armed guard on the doorstep of my heart, this distant doom-chant throb that pounds my brow? How is it that I can't spit out
the sour-breath aftertaste of uneasy dream, re-enthrone the simple trust in whatever seems
that this darkness felt inside has made me doubt? Ten years ago the army went:
we saw the capstans suck the ships from land:
the coiling ropes, retracting, whipped the sand,
fuses burned back to the best fleet ever sent.
They came back before my eyes,
my evidence they're saved is my own sight.
Yet what my soul sings within me's not delight,
but self-taught hymn of horror-prophecies.
How can that my peace of mind,
once still within, be withdrawn so utterly?
Yet can the whirling of my heart be vanity
when it and my knowledge of justice are combined and both predict some terror?
I hope and pray that the blow that I expect
will go astray, that I foresee incorrect,
that everything my sense and reason tell me—is error.
There is a health that is neighbour to disease, sought too hard—over-pressed, and over-trained; there is a prosperity too that is overstrained,
a happiness brings unease,
over-confidence in good fortune's straight-ahead
that will steer a man to wreck on some hidden reef.
The cautious sense when their cargo of luck needs relief, what ballast their ship needs shed;
they recognise too when all's risked by a top-heavy trim, how calamity breaks the mast where the sails over-crowd. Zeus gives and gives to the humble; and to the proud, who take and take, and thereby anger him.
Once his deep blood has rained from a man to the earth, gushing out before his face, released into death,
strophe  
   
antistrophe  
   
     strophe  
    
antistrophe  
    

  
where is the spell that breathes back into him breath?  No magic has that worth:
or if Asclepius knew how to raise the dead,
if he once had the power to display this art,
sooner than let him, Zeus tore him apart,
a lightning-bolt through his head.
The gods send us powers of fate, but they conflict—
and by conflicting, balance. Were it not so
my tongue would cry aloud what my burning guts know; not mutter dark words in the dark my fears constrict.
Enter  .
 
You come in as well. I mean you, Cassandra. Kindly Zeus looks on you too graciously:
he gives you too your place in our sacrifice. All we own is Zeus', including slaves.
  does not move.
Step down from there. Your days of pride are past. Even Heracles, Zeus' son by Alcmene,
was bought and sold once, fed on food of slaves. Since slavehood's how fate's balance falls for you, be glad you're a slave to old nobility.
Those of recent, unexpected wealth misuse their slaves in everything; but we intend to treat you with strict equity.
 
The queen spoke clearly; waits for your reply. Caught as you are in a deadly net, you should obey, if you understand; but perhaps you don't.
 
My words get through to her, even if her wont's the baby-language of her savage brood, barbarian birdsong, twittering swallow-cry.
 
Do as she says! Her word's your least worst good.
Come down from your chariot throne now, and comply.
Still   does not move.
  (with an impatient gesture) Time to waste with you out here is what I don't have any more of; for the beasts stand by, awaiting jugulation where they should.
We sacrifice that the unhoped may come to good.
    
    
    
   Choephoroi   , Eumenides    .

If you will be part of this, then quick, comply.
  remains still and silent.
Or if your mouth couldn't make him understand,      perhaps you should have used those supple hands?
 
The foreign girl needs an interpreter,
glares like a beast at who's just captured her.
 
She's lost her wits, obeys the sorrow-craze
of the hurt mind wrenched from her just-captured home: she will not learn how to bear indignities
till her broken spirit's boiled off in bloody foam.
But I'll waste no more words on her mad insolence. Exit  
 
Truly, I feel pity for her, not wrath.
Descend, poor child, from your new master's chariot:      accept this fate now, try your new yoke on.
Like a statue coming to life   finally descends. When, after a long silence, she eventually speaks her accent and words are markedly foreign, at first unintelligibly so. (It must be the difficulty of making out what she is saying that in part explains the  's difficulty in making out what she means.)
 
Ototoi popoi da. Apollo, Apollo!
 
You name Apollo in your mourning? Why? Is he the god to hear a sorrow's cry?
 
Ototoi popoi da. Apollo, Apollo!
 
Again ill-omenedly she names Apollo— the last of gods to listen to her sorrow.
 
Apollo, Apollo! She-abolisher, my abolisher! The wandering god destroyed me once
by deserting me;
to destroy me again
is no difficulty.
Strophe  
Antistrophe  
Strophe       

  
 
She seems to prophesy her own future pain.
Slavery's come, but the god's spark's still there in her brain.
 
Apollo, Apollo! She-abolisher, my abolisher! You wandering god,
where is it this time
I am left by you?
What is this house
that you've brought me to?
 
This is the Atreids' house. But once told, do you know? If you understand speech, can you hear us say that it's so?
 
A house the gods hate, a history that connives
at in-clan massacres, heads hacked off with knives, floors that swim with kin-blood, chopped-down lives.
 
The blood-hound snuffs and paws obsession's track. She thinks to bring a tale of murders back.
 
This is the evidence I am persuaded by:
Thyestes the Atreid's dismembered infants cry
out of the pan where their limbs and their entrails fry.
 
We've heard about your second-sightedness; but for that news, we need no prophetess.
 
Ah, what lie cries mastery?
What most claw-light miseries,
extraneous evil climbing into nest here,
no wrath of kin nor healing can arrest here, the clan’s men scattered?
 
Her first speech our whole city understood; but this I can't get, even if I would.
 
Woman of ill fortune, will
you really do this? With good will
ply lustral water on that classic head and then— I cannot speak it, but it comes: an end
in stretched cloth shuttered.
Antistrophe  
Strophe  
Antistrophe  
Strophe  
    
Antistrophe  
    
    

 
No clearer yet; her words riddle and blind, confused predictions to my confused mind.
 
Eh, eh, papai, papai, what sight is this?
The fish-mesh trap, the fish-mesh trap of death. The bed-partner, the co-slaughterer, is the net. Let limitless disorder howl its glee,
gloat 'gainst the clan this offering’s infamy.
 
What’s the dark angel you so long to see raising her triumph-cry over this family?
Your words bring night, as sinking warriors let the saffron blood of fear at every breath.
How swift in onset all disaster is.
 
Ah ah, look look, watch watch, keep back the bull! His herd-cow traps him, caught in his own robe, robe that the hidden sword horns with black device; strikes so he falls down where the waters fill.
I tell you of a death-snare bath that kills.
 
I do not have the prophet-interpreter's skills but from this even I can shape some ill.
What else do we ever hear from prophecies? From every seer’s words, pure ill englobes
the anxious hearers, fear’s flame blown to full.
 
Fate—chance—world—what have you done to me? My own destruction’s mixed into what I lament. Why then do you bring me here in misery?
To die together with him: is that what’s meant?
 
A mindless mind, borne off by some divinity;
a museless music, shapeless, strings unbent;
and always tuned, like the mourning-bird’s, to me: grief unending, gripped like a child life-spent.
 
The mourning-bird, sweetly singing her own dreadful doom! And yet the girl changed to bird found a kind of rest.
Her new small brain gave her own sorrows no room;
but I'll still be awake when the splitting blade shatters my crest.
 
Goaded by gods, by spirits vainly driven,
Strophe  
    
Antistrophe  
    
Strophe  
Antistrophe  
    
    

  
frantic and out of tune, resounding fear,
you sing your song, yet still no meaning's given. How did ill prophecy's pathway get you here?
 
I remember the wedding of Paris,
the doom of his friends.
I remember the banks of Scamander,
my family's spring.
On those green happy banks
was this prophet's nurturing;
but the river of hell—on its black and smoking banks— is where she ends.
 
Why spell it out so starkly and so plain?
A child could see your meaning. I'm struck down, lifeblood-bitten by your fate of pain,
by the terror-sorrow melody you sound.
 
I remember my city's long struggles,
the offerings made
by my father against disaster,
slain beasts in a ring
outside our walls—than all which, nothing vainer against destined suffering.
Now into this soil, just like those helpless bulls', my warm blood fades.
 
Still you sing hapless dread with every breath. Some power on high views you maliciously, poisons and overwhelms with this sense of death. Yet where your fates will end you I can't see.
 
My wedding hour arrives, when the veil will lift.
Then in the harsh red wind of your dawning day
you'll see how my words smash down on you in a wave, you'll see how Argos is ten times more crushed than me.
The hour arrives when I speak no more riddles. Then you will be the witnesses how close I trod, how well I smelt, the trail of your old guilt.
Can you not hear the choir that never leave,
that never bless, whose discords edge, this house?
Can you not smell the blood they feed upon,
the coiling blood that’s kept them squatting here?
How will you drive your inborn Furies out
when they scream incest, dynasty-defilement,
when the crimes that found this palace drool from their mouths?
Strophe  
    
Antistrophe  
    
    
    

So tell me that I lie, that I shoot as wild
as a gypsy psychic peddling at the gate.
Tell me I’ve diagnosed wrong, then, if you dare. If you can swear there’s nothing here, then swear.
 
And how could it help if I swore, even honourably? What would that heal? And yet I must wonder at you, here in a distant city, you born overseas—
yet just as if you had been present you speak what is true.
 
God-prophet Apollo made me his prophetess.
 
What! A god, in a fit of tenderness?
 
Until now, it always mattered to hide this shame.
 
But now that you're a slave—it's all the same?
 
He wrestled at his work over me, sweet breath hot.
 
You mean you and he—did the deed whereby children are got?
 
First my consent, then his gift, then my favours withdrawn.
 
Once he'd filled you with his gift, you repelled him with scorn?
 
By then, by that gift, I'd forewarned Troy of all that would follow.
 
And did you manage to do this unharmed by Apollo?
 
He cursed me: I speak always truths, never grasped as true.
 
Yet we've understood and grasped every word from you.
 
Ah God! Ah God! Evil, malice, pain!
    
The labour-pains of my foresight-fit come on;
    

  
barely they're started and my reason drifts,
a useless cork upon the maddened ocean.
Can you not see the nightmare children there,
the revenants, the blood-spectres in the house,
butchered by their own families, holding out
succulent cuts and joints—from their own limbs,      delicate sweetbreads and offal—their own insides,
offering these to their father—and watching him eat?
There is the first cause that led to this vengeance-plot,
to the he-lion skulking behind her who stains his bed,
who lies in wait—ah God!—for my new master's fall
which I must stand and watch as his new slave.
And he, the admiral, king, the taker of Troy,
he Atreus' and Tantalus's heir—
sees only the hand-lick tongue, he does not see
how a fawning bitch can stretch out her ears—or a speech—      and yet within be a ravening destruction.
I tell you she means to do it: she will kill.
What’s the right name to give to a monster like her?
Two-headed serpent, vampire of the coasts
coaxing the ships she’s hexed onto wrecking reefs,
the raging mother of hell exhaling war
on all her kin, the bitch whose triumph-howl—
all-daring as the male-most warrior’s—
showed her ambiguous joy at his return...
Yet does it matter whether I’m believed?
What’s coming, comes. And you who’ll witness it      will have your pain to tell how much truth I hit.
 
I got the bit about Thyestes’ feast,
the cannibal father; that bit made me shrink, knowing—as I do—that it’s not made up. The rest of what you said—I can’t keep up.
 
“The rest” was: you’ll see Agamemnon’s death.
 
Poor girl, you’re mad. Save your blaspheming breath.
 
You think a bandage smothering this will heal it?
 
I won't bewail a blow until the Fates deal it.
 
Trust in your Fates, then. They trust in their blades.     

 
“They”? By what man do you say this crime is made?  
What man? And you claim you grasped every word from me?  
It's only what trick he could use that I can't see.
 
Didn't I say it in Greek? It was not Greek enough to me!  
Apollo's prophets speak Greek; but still delphically.  
Aaah! Oh the fire, the fire that comes over me!
O Apollo, devouring wolf, O the pain you send on me!
(to the  )
She is the lioness, she is the savagery,
when the lion's away she's the bed-company
kept by the skulking jackal... does nobody see?
Her potion's made: one ingredient's death for me.
And hear this She boast, as she whets the knife for her He,
that death is the price of his triumph's including me.
So why stand to be laughed at in clothes of prophecy,
in Apollo's necklace, with staff of augury?
(Tearing and smashing them)
So these meet their end, before my end arrives for me.
To hell with you all: thus your fall pre-avenges me.
Apollo's power now can hoard ruin for some other she.
I am divested, defrocked, disrobed; and he does this to me,
as he just watched while these robes brought me mockery,
as he just watched while his truths in my prophecies
destroyed every bond between me and my family—
destroyed so they cast me out wandering in penury,
destroyed so they shut me out dying in poverty.
And now Apollo the prophet forecloses on me,
devises a fate that bristles lethality:
instead of the fatherland altar, awaiting me
is a chopping-block warm with the blood of the slaughtered He.
And yet these our deaths are not unavenged from on high. Our killers will pay to one who I see draws nigh.
The price for his father's life is: his mother must die. Fugitive exile under a hostile sky,
he will return; and in his returning I
see the capstone action of his clan’s frenzy to die.
For an oath has been sworn by the powers hidden on high that the bait for his trail is to find where his father’s corpse lies.
But why should I wail as if others would pity me? These are the eyes that saw out Troy’s tragedy;
now the death of Troy’s killers is what they see. These are the gods’ black mercies; and they await me. The door of this house is the threshold of hell for me.
    
    
    
    

  
I pray to meet with a well-timed stroke of death,
to bleed out quietly, succumb without fighting for breath; that easy submission may close out the light from these eyes.
 
So much you have suffered; so much you have learned from it; so much you have said. Yet, seeing the truth of it—
the truth of your coming death—how can you just go
like an ox to an altar-bloodshed that you foreknow?
 
My clock has run down. There is no further point in flight.
 
Do not condemned eyes open wide to cram in their last light?
 
My last light is now. I gain nothing by running away.
 
I admire your courage, your steadfastness undismayed.
 
When someone’s being butchered, that’s what the spectators say.
 
But humans are blessed who thus greet their dying day.
  (going forward)
O my father, my dead father and all his dead children!
(Then she stops, her hand goes to her mouth, she bends double)
 
What is the matter? What fear now turns you back?
  (retching)
Pah! Ach!
 
What mind-nausea’s this that makes you spit and hack?
 
The palace stinks. It stinks of dripping blood.
 
It’s just the scent of our offerings to the gods.
 
It sweeps over me like the bad breath from a tomb.
 
What does? The sacrifice incense-fume?
    
    

 
This is no sparrow-reflex, no flight because others fled. After they've killed me, don't forget what I've said:
that for my woman's death, another woman dies,
that another man's blood will pay for this man mis-wived. My claim as your guest-friend here is: do not forget.
 
How I pity the course for you that the gods have set.
 
One last word, for a funeral; one last song, for my own. I pray to the sun, the last sunlight I'll ever see,
that those who will pay for killing him pay also for me: for killing me, slave-girl, unarmed, defenceless, alone. O human life. O life. The happiest man of all
is nothing more than a shadow on a wall;
the woman whose agony fills her life's short day—
one damp-sponge dab wipes all of her away.
And this, more still, brings the endless pity on.
Exit   into the palace.
 
Even the happiest human still wants more
and always more, no matter what he's got; offer further wealth to any house of note,
not one refuses with “We need no more”. The blessed ones above gave our king Troy; they brought us back to him divinely crowned. Is he to pay for those who've died before?
Is a guilt-death died for guilt-death his last lot? Can any human hope for flawless joy
if even Agamemnon's not secure?
  (within)
And now—in my own house—you strike me down?
    
  (The king's scream has broken off their song, which is never resumed) That cry! Who times his strike to cause this shout?
  (within)
Two times, and out of time. My blood is out.
A heavy silence.
 
That scream may mean already it's too late.
And yet—think what to do to save the state!
(One chorus-member after another speaks out individually)
   
Strophe  
    
    

  
To this, in my view, there's just one reply:
to set on this house the citizens' hue and cry.
   
Yes, fall on them at once—that is my view:
catch them red-handed, and red-sworded too.    
This is the opinion I also share.
I vote for action while the moment's there.    
It's clear from how they've started that their rule
will be a harsh and a tyrannical school.
   
They've started thus because we've given them time: dozy Honour, trampled by wideawake Crime!    
Yet how to tell which way our advice should point? The best advice with action is conjoint.
   
I think the same. Until words find a way
to bring the dead back, words have little sway.    
So your advice is—save our necks, sit tight,
bow to these murderers' rule, let might be right?    
No, that's unthinkable. I'd sooner die
than stoop to live beneath their tyranny.
    
Then you two want to start an army coup because—you heard a scream that frightened you?     
    
Ignorant raging only leads to mess.
Wise actions start from knowledge, not from guess.
    
Our thoughts all tend together to one thing:
that our first need's to know all's well with the king.
The   begin to move towards the palace. But as they do so, suddenly its gates are thrown open and   is revealed, standing in a welter of blood, sword in her hand, over the corpses of   and  .
 
    
    

Now I strike down—all I said before;
no shame to cancel words once they're out of time. Someone who's building a trap for the one she hates must meanwhile seem to love him—or see him escape.
I fenced him in with nets too high to leap.
So long I've planned this dénouement of our feud,
and now at last we are come to it today.
So I stand as I struck him, and straddle my handiwork. I did it like this—and why should I deny it?—
so he could neither run nor fight for his life.
I throw an endless coil of ill-rich cloth,
a noose, a net, a murderous snare, around him.
Then twice I run him through, and twice he screams then slides in limp collapse. Once he is down
I shaft him with steel once more, this time as a prayer to subterranean Zeus, the king of the dead.
How quiet he sinks now—his soul starts from his mouth: with one jerked gulp he brings up his own blood, spatters me dark with the scarlet dew in his breath.
And that dew falls on me as the gods' spring rains
fall and bless harvest back to the long-parched earth.
What offering to pour on Agamemnon?
His own blood on him’s just; and more than just, for blood with blood is what he mixed himself, death upon death, crime after blasphemous crime in a cup of wrath that returned to his lips, in time.
That's how things stand, sirs. Rejoice in it if you will, or wail, if you prefer. But my prayer's fulfilled.
 
A shameless mouth, a speech beyond belief.
Your husband killed's your boast and not your grief?
 
Your interrogation fits a witless wife.
But I tell you from a flinchless heart what you all know: whether you praise it or raise blame and woe,
here is Agamemnon, shorn of life,
my husband, dead. The hand that did it's this,
and what it's done is just. That's how it is.
 
What bad-drug poison have you swallowed, lady, what narcotic sweated off the festering earth,
what septic brackishness off sea-lagoon has made you sleepwalk like this into the murderer’s curse?
You’ve cut him down, you’ve cut him off; now we forever cut you out from our community.
    
 
strophe  
    
    
    

  
Yes, now your judgement’s exile from my home,
now you sentence me to the public curse.
Wise judges! Where were you when this man killed? Where were you when, like any lamb from the flock, he picked his own daughter to sacrifice to the weather? To him, our child was one casual two-minute spasm: to me, my dearest and my longest labour.
So now you rush to judgement, being witnesses how I have made him pay the price of her blood. Why didn't you banish him from this fatherland? And if it comes to threats, then hear this threat: I'm ready too. You want me to submit?
Then make me. But remember: god above may give the victory instead to me to rule— a harsh late lesson for some slow old fools.
    
 
High and mighty your demeanour, lady,
arrogant your speech: as you have been
maddened by your killing, that has stained you, patched and blotched of face, plain bloodshed seen. Dishonoured, friendless, clanless, you will see
sharp justice fall on your sharp treachery.
 
Then hear too the words of my righteous oath:
By the Justice now completed for my child,
by the Ruin and Fury as whom I have killed her killer,
no prospect of fear walks within this my palace
so long as Aegisthus lights the fire in my hearth,
so long as Aegisthus is loyal as heretofore;
Aegisthus my shield, my complete security.
Here lies the man who would destroy his wife,
toyboy of every slave-girl made at Troy;
and with him lies his prisoner-prophetess,
lying with him one last time—as foreseen:
faithful to him, no doubt, except when the sailors
wanted her helping hand to polish their masts.
Here the pair of them get their reward. So he lies thus, and she, having sung her own dirge like the dying swan, lies here beside him—the woman who mastered this man. Thus united in death, this touching, loving pair
add their zest to the joys of the bed Aegisthus now shares.
 
Silence and unconsciousness, come quickly to us:
spare us the slow and helpless bed of pain:
close down our minds, send thick unknowing through us, let us see no more who have seen our kind master slain. The best of lords, for one sister he went to war.
To be killed by the other: is that what he came home for? Helen demented:
one death to so many—
antistrophe  
    
    
strophe  
    

one destructiveness hell-led that does not spare any, comes Helen, comes hell. Helen: her brow bedecked Helen: with blood that's shed Helen: this house is wrecked by her bad spell.
 
Spare us your death-wish prayers; don’t presume that these things are your burdens to assume. And do not fulminate at my sister Helen. She was far from the sole mover of Troy’s destiny. Could she, one girl alone, bring so much doom?
 
You evil spirit on this house of brothers,
on Agamemnon and on Menelaus,
evil spirit of two sisters, mothers
of this heart-crushing oppression that must slay us, when you straddled his dead form, the thing I saw was a carrion crow glut-gloating victory-caw.
 
What you say is right at least in this—
you see a bad force in this house, and so there is:
a daemon that gorges on three generations' deaths,
that trains our tongues to the taste of blood on the breath, bursts each scab that forms into fresh red nemesis.
 
You name this house's guardian-angel master, a wicked angel, heavy in its wrath,
evil to name, restless to bring disaster.
And all this comes to us in Zeus's path.
Zeus causes all, and for all Zeus must answer. Of every tale we start, Zeus tells the end. What part of this is not something he sends?
Come then my king, you who conquered Troy,
you Atreus' and Tantalus's heir:
how shall I weep for you, how speak my love to dead air? To lie like this, life choked out so blasphemously, strangled to death in this spider's silken snare!
To die so naked, so helpless, all your majesty
by a two-edged blade and a two-faced woman destroyed!
 
So can you only see this deed as mine? Do not think so; and do not speak of me as Agamemnon's wife. A power divine animates this corpse's wife in parody:
antistrophe  
    
     strophe  
    
     

  
it is the harsh and ancient vengeance-power that led your Atreus to child-cannibal feast which now pays out Agamemnon in his hour, unites in death this greatest with those least.
 
You want someone to say you're clean of this? You, innocent of this murder? With those hands? If anyone else is guilty, call your witnesses!
Should we say Atreus' ghost beside you stands? Yet if anyone's your partner Ares is, artery-emptying god of kin-blood war,
matching shambles now with cannibal feast before.
Come then my king, you who conquered Troy,
you Atreus' and Tantalus's heir:
how shall I weep for you, how speak my love to dead air? To lie like this, life choked out so blasphemously, strangled to death in this spider's silken snare!
To die so naked, so helpless, all your majesty
by a two-edged blade and a two-faced woman destroyed!
 
You think his killing was ignoble work? I don't.
For he destroyed his home by treachery;
lured Iphigeneia with a suitor he knew she’d want;
once he got her to Aulis, swapped Achilles for butchery. His doing and my deed are exactly met,
so he will make no boast of his in hell:
for her blood spilt, his own blood has been let.
He killed her by falsehoods, by falsehoods he dies as well.
 
I cannot answer you; my mind is numbed.
Once my wit was prompt; now nothing comes.
The house of Atreus falls; and where to turn?
The tell-tale red rain dripped before; now it floods
in courage- and roof-breaking streams of blood,
while justice’ blade is sharpened on Fate’s stone
so new killings may for previous killings atone.
I’d rather I’d been swallowed by the earth
than I should live to see my sovereign king
in a death-bed bath of silver panelling.
Who’ll bury him? Who eulogise his worth?
Does Clytaemestra have the nerve for that,
to kill her husband and then speak his elegy?
Do you really dare crown these enormities
with solemn tributes that—somehow fall flat?
When this last of the heroes is placed on his funeral-bier who will mourn him for real, with true and unforced tears?
antistrophe  
    
    
 
strophe       
    
    
  What concern of yours could that possibly be?

 He fell and he died among us; among us he
will find due burial, though not our tears.
At Acheron Iphigeneia will appear;
she’ll greet him as his daughter, lovingly;
her healing embrace will restore the stolen years.
 
I understand that his shame answers hers;
I understand how hard to unravel the curse.
The plunderer is plundered; who slays, pays.
So it remains, while Zeus remains enthroned:
for the things we inflict, the things that we suffer atone. But who could drive this house’s taint out—who? Their ruin-Furies stick to them like glue. 
 
In this indeed you have hit true prophecy.
But now I am willing to let go all history
to settle a truce with those ruin-demons of fate:
I’ll swallow my pain if the Furies will go from our gate to drown someone else in their murderous misery.
A small price to pay for the end of this circling hate!
Enter  .
O happy dawn of the day of my revenge! 
Now we can say that the gods are observers of men,
now we can say that earth’s crimes are noticed on high,
now that I see him caught in the Furies’ web—
Agamemnon, my enemy, now so deliciously down,
paying at last for the trap that his father schemed.
When Atreus ruled this land, his brother Thyestes,
father to me, seemed a threat to the kingly bed
(to speak quite plain). So Atreus drove him out,
barred him from his own home and his own town.
When my poor father returned a suppliant,
begged for his life from this Agamemnon’s father,
he got just a promise that he would not be killed.
Then with a relish that was not the loving sort
the blasphemous Atreus made my father welcome.
He claimed he had laid a special banquet on,
and so he had: two slaughtered Thyestes’ sons.
He hid in the bottom of the dish the telltale bits,
the boys’ fingers and toes, their heads and ears and such,
and served this “special dish” to my father alone.
My father was hungry, and wolfed the dish down without question— the dish that you see has destroyed this whole dynasty.
Then when he got to the proof of what he’d just eaten,
he screamed, he retched, he rocked in agony;
and kicking to pieces the table at which he’d sat
antistrophe       
     
    
     
   Unless—as is unlikely—this song was written irregular, ten lines of   are missing here.
  Clytaemnestraexplainsthatsheisnowreadytobringanendtothecycleofvendetta;atonceAegisthusenterswithacry of “revenge at last”. The cycle is nowhere near ready to end yet.

  
he laid his world-heavy curse upon Atreus’ house, dooming them all to a similar destruction.
This is the reason you see Agamemnon down.
I made it happen, and I had the right to kill.
For I was the third son, younger brother to those who were cooked, too young to run into a trap, a mere baby then.
So me and my father, the floating splintered spars
of the family he’d just smashed, Atreus drove out again.
And what brings me back here, full grown? Why, Justice does. Agamemnon never escaped me, even in exile:
I never forgot my clear duty to bring him to ruin.
So at last I’ve seen him caught within Justice’ snare.
Even to die now is something that I could bear.
 
Aegisthus, delight in disaster’s not honoured by me.
But you tell us you killed him by your own fore-intention, that you alone planned it—this heartbreaking butchery.
So we tell you: this will meet with no cowed condoning. The curse of the people will fall on your head like a stoning.
 
Thus the galley-slave to the captain at the helm.
Thus you openly state your mutinous intention.
Will starving in prison teach you who rules in this realm?
You will find mine sour medicine; I teach in a punishing school. But that’s what it takes to get through to a stubborn old fool. You can surely see this, if your eye’s not yet wholly unsighted: we’re going to ride you, so you might as well not fight it.
 
Dodging call-up, you wait in his home—
you girl—for the real men to come
home from the battle; worse, more,
while you’re waiting, you turn his wife whore.
And this is the creature who now has his hand on the crown— the coward, the traitor, who brought Agamemnon down?
 
These insults too will bring you to plenty of pain. Orpheus’ voice, they say, made all things tame, tamed beasts of hell; which your bleat just provokes. We’ll break you yet. We’ll see you in the yoke.
 
As if my king could be someone like you—
a man who plots murder safely out of view,
then calls in a woman to do what he dare not do.
 
But clearly the killing was for his wife to see through. I was too suspect: I hated him, and he knew.
But now Agamemnon’s cash can ease my way:
    
    
    
    

I will turn ruler. And he who won’t obey
will find my yoke so heavy he wastes away.
Hunger that houses with darkness will put him straight: no food here for those who will not pull their weight.
 
You want his spoils—but not to fight for them,
so, craven coward, you set this woman on him—
this woman now god-marked with murderer’s brand, this abomination roaming in our land.
So we must hope Orestes is living still,
that his return’s in some happy fortune’s hand;
for there are two here that he needs to kill.
 
So you mean to act as treacherous as you speak?
[To his soldiers] Draw your swords. This fight’s not far to seek.
 
Our swords are ready too. We stand on guard.
 
And so do I myself. To die’s not hard.
 
You plan to die? Now there’s a welcome word.
  [restraining  ] No, my best of men. Enough blood’s flowed; what we have done already must be paid,
a dismal sum, already pain to pay.
So even though provoked, let us shed no more. Reverend elders, take your way back home. Learn to move with the times before they bite. We had to do this, just as we have done it.
If we could cure the pain we’ve caused, we would; for it truly pains us, what we’ve had to do.
If you care to learn from it, such is my woman’s view.
 
So I must listen while the mob’s jeers bloom,
take whatever windy insults come my way?
Though I’m their ruler, must let them tempt doom?
 
To fawn on your sort’s not the Argive way.
 
I’ll get even with you, be sure, in the days to come.
 
Not if the fates bring Orestes safely through.
    
    
    

  
 
All exiles live on ifs: I know that too.
 
So go on! Get fat on your thieving, now you can.
 
You will pay for these words to me, you foolish man.     
 
How bravely you crow! But this cockerel’s behind his hen.
 
How the dogs bark. But ignore them. I and you, to set this house aright, we have much to do.